1. Token Assorted: Mixing Latent and Text Tokens for Improved Language Model Reasoning
2. Scaling up Test-Time Compute with Latent Reasoning: A Recurrent Depth Approach


## Token Assorted: Mixing Latent and Text Tokens for Improved Language Model Reasoning

Paper: https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.03275

Date: 05.02.2025

##### Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) excel at reasoning and planning when trained on chainof-thought (CoT) data, where the step-by-step thought process is explicitly outlined by text tokens. However, this results in lengthy inputs where many words support textual coherence rather than core reasoning information, and processing these inputs consumes substantial computation resources. In this work, we propose a hybrid representation of the reasoning process, where we partially abstract away the initial reasoning steps using latent discrete tokens generated by VQ-VAE, significantly reducing the length of reasoning traces. We explore the use of latent trace abstractions in two scenarios: 1) training the model from scratch for the Keys-Finding Maze problem, 2) fine-tuning LLMs on this hybrid data with an extended vocabulary including unseen latent tokens, for both logical and mathematical reasoning problems. To facilitate effective learning, we introduce a simple training procedure that randomly mixes latent and text tokens, which enables fast adaptation to new latent tokens. Our approach consistently outperforms the baselines methods in various benchmarks.

## Scaling up Test-Time Compute with Latent Reasoning: A Recurrent Depth Approach

Paper: https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.05171

Date: 07.02.2025

##### Abstract
We study a novel language model architecture that is capable of scaling test-time computation by implicitly reasoning in latent space. Our model works by iterating a recurrent block, thereby unrolling to arbitrary depth at test-time. This stands in contrast to mainstream reasoning models that scale up compute by producing more tokens. Unlike approaches based on chain-of-thought, our approach does not require any specialized training data, can work with small context windows, and can capture types of reasoning that are not easily represented in words. We scale a proof-of-concept model to 3.5 billion parameters and 800 billion tokens. We show that the resulting model can improve its performance on reasoning benchmarks, sometimes dramatically, up to a computation load equivalent to 50 billion parameters.
